# 2023-09-21 - Spokane Fall Championship

90 minutes Me (800-1200?) vs David Griffin (1400-1600?)

```
PGN:

1. d4 e6 2. Bf4 Nf6 3. Nf3 Be7 4. e3 a6 5. c4 c5 6. Bd3 cxd4 7. exd4 Qb68. b3 Nc6 9. Bc2 Nb4 10. O-O Nxc2 11. Qxc2 O-O 12. h3 d6 13. Nc3 Qd8 14. Rfe1 Bd7 15. Rad1 Rc8 16. Ne4 Nxe4 17. Qxe4 Bc6 18. Qd3 Bxf3 19. Qxf3 d5 20. cxd5 exd5 21. Qg3 Bf6 22. Re3 Rc2 23. a4 Bh4 24. Bc7 Rxc7 25. Qf3 Bf6 26. Rc3 Rxc3 27. Qxc3 Qc8 28. Qf3 Qe6 29. Rd3 Rc8 30. Re3 Qd6 31. g3 Bxd4 32. Qg4 Rc1+ 33. Kg2 Bxe3 34. fxe3 Qf6 35. h4 Qf1+ 36. Kh2 Rc2+ 37. Qe2 Rxe2#
```

## Walk Through

1. I opened thinking of doing the London and he did something pretty non-commital.
2. I continued with the London and he... is he going to fiancetto f-Bishop?
3. Me: London, Him: SUPER passive bishop move to allow for King-side castling.
4. I am confused, why is he being so passive?
5. I decide to break from the London and take more center space, and BAM he fires away at the center.
6. To preserve my pawn structure, I allow him to take in the center on my terms.
7. I retake, so I can have two pawns in the center of the board. He brings his Queen out, looking at a pawn.
8. I defend my pawn, he finally develops that second Knight.
9. I defend my center, he attacks my Bishop.
10. I let him take my Bishop with his most developed piece, and castle.
11. I retake his Knight and he castles. (**I feel WAY better developed them him.**)
12. I block his Knight from jumping in front of my King and he pushes a center pawn a little.
13. I develop my Knight, he undevelops his Queen?
14. I develop a Rook, he moves his Bishop to the center?
15. I develop a Rook, he develops a Rook to a half-open file.
16. I offer a Knight trade? (Because I'm out of ideas?) He accepts.
17. I retake with my Queen, he develops his Bishop to Queen-check.
18. I move my queen, but defend the Knight behind it and he immediately takes the Knight. (It feels like he was unwilling to keep the tension, but now I think he stopped my mating attack. Damn.)
19. I retake with my Queen, he moves a center pawn to crack open the center.
20. We trade some center pawns.
21. I move my Queen in front of his King, but he blocks the mating attack.
22. **I start to get tired? I run out of ideas?** We both move a Knight, I'm slow, he attacks a pawn.
23. I defend my pawn, and he attacks my Queen. **Maybe I panicked?**
24. **I touch my Bishop, and am forced to move it. I lose it to save my Queen.** - **Crap: touch chess.**
25. I move my Queen to safety, he retreats his successful Bishop. **I am probably disheartened and demoralized.**
26. I get hyper-focused on defending a pawn and offer a Rook trade? **Bad idea.** He accepts.
27. I retake the rook, he offers a Queen trade.
28. I deny the Queen trade, and he develops his Queen.
29. Low on morale and ideas, I made a Rook move (that is too slow?). He moves his Rook to checking attack.
30. I check his Queen, he moves it.
31. I feel a checkmate coming, and try to give my King some breathing room with a pawn move. He snaps up a Bishop and threatens a Rook.
32. I find a "mate in one" attack, but he checks me out of it. **I was too slow, I planned poorly.**
33. I move my King, he takes a Rook. **My morale lowers.**
34. I retake a Bishop, he moves his Queen in to Checkmate.
35. I try to give my King space, but he checks. **I would have lasted longer if I traded Queens?**
36. My King moves.
37. He checkmates.

## My Thoughts: Before Checking the Computer

### By Move

* (11) I feel I developed well.
* (18) I thought he was just trading pieces willy-nilly. But, no, this halted my mating plan.
* (23) I didn't see this coming, and panicked. Then I touched a piece and was forced to move it. Lost a full Bishop for free. Morale lost.
* (27) I shouldn't have traded rooks.
* (29 on) I have some half-formed mating attack ideas, but just one move to slow.

### High-Level

* I got tired fast.
* I developed well, but didn't plan well after that.
* I touched a piece and thus lost it.
* I was too slow in developing a plan to counter his attack.
* I ended the game with 45 minutes left on the clock.
  * What it have ended differently if I had spent 5 or 10 minutes on a key move late in the game?

## Checking the Computer

* (3) His first three moves actually are amoung the best engine moves. So, I wasn't prepared for my opening.
* (6) Stockfish hates that I didn't retake his pawn, and where I put my Bishop.
* (8) Stockfish doesn't like that I defended my pawn? I don't see it.
* (16) I shouldn't have offerred a Knight trade, I should have pushed in the center. Here I lost all my advantage.
* (17) Stockfish also thinks I should have pushed my pawn in the center to block the Queen-check. I agree, I lost my mating attack here. I _think_ I just didn't see/consider this move.
* (19) I shouldn't have traded pawns, but kept the center locked. I agree. (I even considered it.)
* (20) I didn't find a plan, and just hid my Queen in the corner. **Stockfish says I lost 2.3 with this move! From winning to equal.**
* (34) I should have traded Queens.
