# 2023-09-28 - Spokane Fall Championship

90 minutes Alberto ALberty (800-1400?) vs Me (800-1200?)

```
PGN

1. e4 e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bc4 Nf6 4. Ng5 d5 5. exd5 Na5 6. Bb5+ c6 7. dxc6 bxc6 8. Qe2 Bd7 9. Qxe5+ Qe7 10. Qxe7+ Bxe7 11. Ba4 h6 12. Nf3 O-O 13. Nc3 Rfe8 14. O-O Rad8 15. d3 Nb7 16. Be3 Nc5 17. Bb3 a5 18. Bc4 Be6 19. Bxe6 Nxe6 20. Rfe1 Rb8 21. b3 Bb4 22. Bd2 Nd5 23. Nxd5 Bxd2 24. Nf6+ gxf6 25. Nxd2 Nd4 26. Re4 Nxc2 27. Rc1 Nb4 28. h3 Nxd3 29. Rxc6 f5 30. Rxe8+ Rxe8 31. Kf1 Re1#
```

## Walk Through

1. My opening, great.
2. Two Knights, great.
3. The Italian Game. I play `3. Nf6??`. **This is me not knowing opening.**
4. He moves his Knight to attack `f7` with his Bishop, I block with `d5`; the only weapon available.
5. He takes my `d5` with his central e pawn. But that checks my Knight, and if I don't move it to the edge of the board, I will lose it. Learned that the hard way.
6. He checks with his Bishop, I block with a pawn.
7. We trade pawns, leaving my Queenside pawns in shambles.
8. He defends his Bishop with his Queen, threatening my Knight on `a5`. (I am also paranoid at this point of the attacks he could make with his Queen.)
9. His Queen takes my central pawn with check. I decide to block with my Queen: a Queen trade seems better for me than letting his Queen push me around.
10. We trade Queens, and I develop with my Bishop so I can castle.
11. He backs off his Bishop, so I don't take it. I move a pawn to kick his Knight away.
12. His Knight reteats, I castle.
13. He develops a Knight, I develop a Rook.
14. He castles, I develop my last Rook to the center. (My Rooks are central, behind my Bishops.)
15. He develops a Pawn to open up a Bishop. I start to reroute a "Knight on the Rim" to attack his weak Bishop.
16. He centralizes his Bishop, and I complete the Bishop attack with my Knight.
17. He slides his Bishop back, to force a trade if I take it with my Knight. I slide a pawn up to prepare to pin his Bishop. But his Knight defends from the Pawn.
18. He decides his Bishop is doomed, I counter his Bishop with me. Hoping for a trade that gives my Rook a file.
19. We trade white Bishops.
20. He centralizes a Rook. I threaten an undended Pawn, but if he moves it his Knight is undefended.
21. He moves the Pawn, leaving his Knight undefended. I pin his Knight to a Rook with a Bishop.
22. He blocks my Rook pin with a Bishop, then I move to attack his Knight with one of mine.
23. He takes my Knight, I take his Bishop.
24. He checks me with his Knight, so I have to lose a turn taking it.
25. He keeps the exchange even by taking my Bishop. (Damn, that Knight-check let him even the exchange.) I attack the base of his strong pawn structure with my Knight.
26. He saves his Rook at the cost of a Pawn.
27. He tries to kick my Knight out, but I can still attack two of his pawns.
28. He makes an escape square for his King, so I get to take a central pawn.
29. He threatens two of my Pawns, so (danger levels) I threaten one of his Rooks.
30. We trade Rooks.
31. He blunders mate with `31. Kf1??`.


## My Thoughts: Before Checking the Computer

### Important Moves

* (3) If I knew anything about openings I would be making terrible mistakes on move 3. `Bc5` is the move.
* (8) Did I assume he had a better idea than he did? It looks like I should have taken the Bishop: `9. .. cxb5 10. Qxb5+ Bd7 11. Qxe5+ Bf7`? Is that the end of his attack? I guess I would only be up one Pawn in that exchange.
* (22) My `22. .. Nd5` wasn't really anything. A lot of forced trades. I had no idea here. Was I playing Hope Chess? Or did I just not see `24. Nf6+`, which made the exchange even?
* (29) My `f5` was less clever than I thought, it just caused a Rook exchange. Was `Kg7` better? I was also trying to defend from getting pushed around with: `Rg4`.
* (31) I didn't win the game; he lost the game.

### High-Level Thoughts

* He blundered me a win. Not a _lot_ of joy for my first tournament victory.
* I need to learn openings. I ran a bad line in the Italian Game that has hurt me before.
* My board visualization is weak: when I play daily games online, I use the chess-com "analysis board". I need to stop that.

## My Thoughts: After Checking the Computer

* (3) Yup, `Bc5` is better.
* (8) DAMN, I should have taken the Bishop.
* (9) Huh, it thinks my `9. .. Bf7` lost me 3 pawns in advantage, versus the `Qf7` I played. _I don't understand why._
* I was 2+ pawns down in evaluation for most of the game. I wasn't doing _great_.
