---
layout: post
title: "Analyzing My Own Language Corpus"
tags: [Software, Data Analysis, Language]
summary: I analyzed the last 12 months of my own vocabulary.
---

{% include JB/setup %}

I dug up thousands chats and text messages from the last year to analyze my own word choices and vocabulary.

This started because I am learning a new language and I wanted to build a quick list of all the most important words I would need. Obviously, all languages have huge vocabularies to learn.  But I reason that each person tends to use their own slightly unique set of "most common words".  I decided to analyze the last 12 months of Google Chats I have sent, as I think they are a better representation of my daily speech than, say, emails or formal writing.

The most common 100 words I (apparently) use are:

> i the a to is it and that you not of in have but for are just be do will on like so my am we was they can yeah if this would at or me with know about good well oh all he there get your think really one though work time out she some more did as no what up mean sure people an okay lol see lot from still had now want could them maybe how cool right job day guess make got go than hard when much because ah also love pretty going awesome should only

This result comes after analyzing about 20,000 lines I have written in the past 12 months, and doing some basic data clean-up:

* **Made everything lowercase**
* **Removed nearly all punctuation and non-vocab syntax**
* **Removed Contractions** - That is, "can't" became "can" and "not".
* **Removed Numbers and Web Addresses**

What I was looking for was a big list of the nouns and verbs I need to learn. But what I actually got was a treasure trove of information about myself and the English language.  Things I learned:

* **Not Nouns and Verbs** - Most of the top 100 words are not nouns or verbs at all but: articles, conjuctions, pronouns, and the to-be verb.
* **Me Me Me** - I never realized how much I must talk about myself.  The first word on my list is `I`, and `my` and `me` make the top 40. So that's a hard truth.
* **Vocab Size** - I also found that I have about an 80,000 word vocabulary (if you include proper nouns), but of that the first 1,000 words are far more common. (Apparently, these should be the words to focus on when learning a new language.)

> TODO: 1. Find most common nouns, verbs, and adjectives. 2. Fix yeah=yes, had=have, has=have, loved=love, loves=love, was=is, "to be"=is, "will be"=is, people=person, knew=know. 3. Write a script to pull out pronouns, to-bes, conjunctions, oh/ow/um/aww/lol/etc/ and articles.
