---
layout: post
title: "Heroes"
tags: [Environment, Charity]
summary: An Incomplete List of Humanities Heroes
---
{% include JB/setup %}


## The Incomplete List

Every day people all around the world wake up and get out of bed early to work hard to support their families, their communities, and strangers they've never met. Good people do absolutely everything they can to help others without predjudice or alterior motive. Parents, teachers, nurses, doctors, and jobs without titles.

We will never be able to list all their names, but the world only exists today because of them.

But where I can find actual names of individuals who did amazing things, I will add them to this list.  These are our heroes.

No human being is perfect, if you want I'm sure you'll find something you don't like about everyone on this list, and indeed everyone who has ever lived. History isn't simple. People are not entirely good or bad. Every historical person you want to learn about will be a complicated mix of the two, because life isn't simple. But we must find heroes in the real world, and recognize the great things they did.


## Norman Borlaug

Norman Borlaug is often credited as having saved a billion human lives.

Norman traveled the world for decades, taking his family to places that had real problems with food security. And he introduced new strains of wheat and other crops, and modern farming practices, to help communities become more food secure.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norman_Borlaug


## Chuck Feeney

Chuck Feeney was a billionaire businessman who gave away all 8 billion dollars of his personal wealth, to live a simple, secure life. He donated his money primarily to education for those who couldn't afford it.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chuck_Feeney


## Stanislav Petrov

On 26 September 1983, Petrov was the duty officer at the command center for the Oko nuclear early-warning system when the system reported that a missile had been launched from the United States, followed by up to five more. Petrov judged the reports to be a false alarm. His subsequent decision to disobey orders, against Soviet military protocol, is credited with having prevented an erroneous retaliatory nuclear attack on the United States and its NATO allies that could have resulted in a large-scale nuclear war which could have wiped out half of the population of the countries involved.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanislav_Petrov
